Welcome to Wikipedia,
the free encyclopedia that anyone can edit.
6,839,563 articles in English
From today's featured article
Cyclone Taylor (June 23, 1884 – June 9, 1979) was a Canadian professional ice hockey player and civil servant. Born and raised in Southern Ontario, Taylor moved to Houghton, Michigan, and played in the International Hockey League for two years. He then joined the Ottawa Senators, winning the Stanley Cup with the team in his second year. While in Ottawa he began working as an immigration clerk. Two years later he signed with the Renfrew Creamery Kings, becoming the highest-paid athlete in the world on a per-game basis. He then played for the Vancouver Millionaires until 1922, where he won five scoring championships and his second Stanley Cup victory with the team. In 1914 Taylor was the first Canadian official to board the Komagata Maru, a major incident relating to Canadian immigration. In 1946 he was named a member of the Order of the British Empire for his services as an immigration officer and inducted into the Hockey Hall of Fame in 1947. (Full article...)
Recently featured:
Capri-Sun
Giraffe
Japanese aircraft carrier Hiyō
Archive
By email
More featured articles
About
Did you know ...
Yulia Lipnitskaya
... that at the 2014 Olympic Games, Yulia Lipnitskaya (pictured) became Russia's youngest-ever Winter Olympic gold medalist?
... that a Utah radio station read books to listeners, a Chapter a Day?
...  that Italian pianist and composer Maria Luigia Pizzoli posthumously received the title of Maestro di Contrappunto (master of counterpoint)?
... that because Larrabee County was not established, Iowa remains a state with 99 counties?
... that Yazathingyan Nga Mauk betrayed his brother, Commander Nga Nu, after being promised Nu's wife, Queen Saw Omma, in marriage?
... that climate change in Asia is expected to increase already-high flood risks in Asian cities, potentially affecting 932 million people?
... that the SkyBridge Alternatives Conference has been called the "Super Bowl of hedge funds"?
... that after performing a tour, football club Santa Cruz Futebol Clube had four fewer players, two of them being dead?
... that according to one creationist journal, HIV has its origins in the Fall?
Archive
Start a new article
Nominate an article
In the news
Iberian lynx
The Iberian lynx (pictured) is reclassified from endangered to vulnerable on the IUCN Red List.
American baseball player Willie Mays dies at the age of 93.
In basketball, the Boston Celtics defeat the Dallas Mavericks to win the NBA Finals.
A fire in a residential building in Mangaf, south of Kuwait City, kills fifty people.
Ongoing:
Israel–Hamas war
timeline
Russian invasion of Ukraine
timeline
Sudanese civil war
timeline
Recent deaths:
James K. Irving
Gerhard Klingenberg
Daniel Patrick Reilly
Anouk Aimée
Donald Sutherland
Mike Brumley
Nominate an article
On this day
June 23: Grand Duke's Official Birthday in Luxembourg
Pierre de Coubertin
1594 – Anglo-Spanish War: During the Action of Faial, an English attempt to capture a Portuguese carrack, reputedly one of the richest ever to set sail from the Indies, caused it to explode with all the treasure lost.
1894 – Led by French historian Pierre de Coubertin (pictured), an international congress at the Sorbonne in Paris formed the International Olympic Committee to revive the ancient Olympic Games.
1944 – The Holocaust: After a closely supervised visit to Theresienstadt Ghetto in German-occupied Czechoslovakia, Red Cross official Maurice Rossel reported that conditions there were "almost normal".
2014 – Under the terms of UN Security Council Resolution 2118, the last of Syria's declared chemical weapons were shipped out for destruction.
Aymer de Valence, 2nd Earl of Pembroke (d. 1324)Len Hutton  (b. 1916)Bill Torrey (b. 1934)Joss Whedon (b. 1964)
More anniversaries:
June 22
June 23
June 24
Archive
By email
List of days of the year
Today's featured picture
Long Tack Sam (1884–1961) was a Chinese-born American magician, acrobat, and vaudeville performer. Little is known about his early years, although he is known to have joined a group of acrobats around 1900 called the Tian-Kwai, with whom he toured the world. Several years later, amid unrest in China, he brought his troupe of entertainers to the United States, where he performed extensively for several decades. This colour lithograph poster featuring Long was printed in Hamburg, Germany, in 1919. It illustrates his conscious use of luxurious embroidered costumes and elaborate scenery to enhance his mystique and capitalise on Western notions of "the mysterious Orient".
Poster credit: Studio of Adolph Friedlander; restored by Adam Cuerden
Recently featured:
Pinguicula vulgaris
Venus Anadyomene
Lockheed Martin F-35 Lightning II
Archive
More featured pictures
Other areas of Wikipedia
Community portal – The central hub for editors, with resources, links, tasks, and announcements.
Village pump – Forum for discussions about Wikipedia itself, including policies and technical issues.
Site news – Sources of news about Wikipedia and the broader Wikimedia movement.
Teahouse – Ask basic questions about using or editing Wikipedia.
Help desk – Ask questions about using or editing Wikipedia.
Reference desk – Ask research questions about encyclopedic topics.
Content portals – A unique way to navigate the encyclopedia.
Wikipedia's sister projects
Wikipedia is written by volunteer editors and hosted by the Wikimedia Foundation, a non-profit organization that also hosts a range of other volunteer projects:
CommonsFree media repository
MediaWikiWiki software development
Meta-WikiWikimedia project coordination
WikibooksFree textbooks and manuals
WikidataFree knowledge base
WikinewsFree-content news
WikiquoteCollection of quotations
WikisourceFree-content library
WikispeciesDirectory of species
WikiversityFree learning tools
WikivoyageFree travel guide
WiktionaryDictionary and thesaurus
Wikipedia languages
This Wikipedia is written in English. Many other Wikipedias are available; some of the largest are listed below.
1,000,000+ articles
العربية
مصرى
Deutsch
Español
فارسی‎
Français
Italiano
Nederlands
日本語
Polski
Português
Русский
Svenska
Українська
Tiếng Việt
中文
250,000+ articles
Bahasa Indonesia
Bahasa Melayu
閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gú
Български
Català
Čeština
Dansk
Esperanto
Euskara
עברית
Հայերեն
한국어
Magyar
Norsk bokmål
Română
Simple English
Srpski
Srpskohrvatski
Suomi
Türkçe
Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча
50,000+ articles
Asturianu
Azərbaycanca
বাংলা
Bosanski
کوردی
Eesti
Ελληνικά
Frysk
Gaeilge
Galego
Hrvatski
ქართული
Kurdî
Latviešu
Lietuvių
മലയാളം
Македонски
မြန်မာဘာသာ
Norsk nynorsk
ਪੰਜਾਬੀ
Shqip
Slovenčina
Slovenščina
ไทย
తెలుగు
اردو
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Main_Page&oldid=1225315602"